# PreREISE
This package gathers and builds demand, hydro, solar, and wind profiles. The
profiles are needed to run scenarios on the U.S. electrical grid.




## 1. Setup/Install
In the PreREISE package, locate the ***setup.py*** file and type:
`pip3 install .`. The other option is to update the PYTHONPATH environment
variable.



## 2. Gather Data for Simulation
This module aims at gathering the required data for building the profiles

### Profile Naming Convention
We call the time series profiles directly generated from mathematical/heuristic
models without any scaling (as we do in different scenarios) as 'raw' profiles.
The name of a raw profile in the simulation framework complies with following
rule:

[***Network***]\_[***Profile Type***]\_v[***M***].[***D***].[***C***]
* ***Network*** specifies the network that a profile applies. It could be an
interconnection or a combination of two interconnections. Available options
are: 'texas', 'western', 'eastern', 'usa' and 'texaswestern'.
* ***Profile Type*** specifies the type of a profile. Available options
currently are: '*wind*', '*solar*', '*hydro*', '*demand*'.
* ***M*** is an integer that specifies the methodology used to generate the
corresponding profile. Details for these methodologies are presented in the
tables below.
* ***D*** is an integer that specifies the dimensionality of the corresponding
profile, i.e., #hours * #generators or #loadzones.
* ***C*** is an integer that specifies other changes to the corresponding
profile except for M and D, such as fixing a bug, etc.

---
##### Note:
1. ***M***, ***D*** and ***C*** are independent of each other and the meaning
of each value is defined globally for a particular ***Network*** and ***Profile
Type***. For example, the eastern_wind_v1.2.3 and eastern_wind_v2.2.4 profiles
would be generated by different methodologies, proceeded with different
fixes/changes but have exactly same dimensionality.
2. Profile names for combinations of interconnections are defined according to
the latest profiles among the interconnections it combines.
---

The list of profiles created can be consulted through the following links:
* [demand][demand_profiles]
* [hydro][hydro_profiles]
* [solar][solar_profiles]
* [wind][wind_profiles]


### A. Wind data

#### i. Rapid Refresh
[RAP][RAP] (Rapid Refresh) is the continental-scale NOAA hourly-updated
assimilation/modeling system operational at the National Centers for
Environmental Prediction (NCEP). RAP covers North America and is comprised
primarily of a numerical weather model and an analysis system to initialize
that model. RAP provides, every hour ranging from May 2012 to date, the U and
V components of the wind speed at 80 meter above ground on a 13x13 square
kilometer resolution grid every hour. Data can be retrieved using the NetCDF
Subset Service. Information on this interface is described [here][NetCDF]. Note
that the dataset is incomplete and, consequently, missing entries need to be
imputed.

Once the U and V components of the wind are converted to a non-directional
wind speed magnitude, this speed is converted to power using wind turbine
power curves. Since real wind farms are not currently mapped to TAMU network
farms, a capacity-weighted average wind turbine power curve is created for each
state based on the turbine types reported in [EIA Form 860][EIA 860]. The wind
turbine curve for each real wind farm is looked up from a database of curves
(or the *IEC class 2* power curve provided by NREL in the
[WIND Toolkit documentation][WIND_doc]) is used for turbines without curves in
the database), and scaled from the real hub heights to 80m hub heights using an
alpha of 0.15. These height-scaled, turbine-specific curves are averaged to
obtain a state curve translating wind speed to normalized power. States without
wind farms in [EIA Form 860][EIA 860] are represented by the *IEC class 2*
power curve.

Each turbine curve represents the instantaneous power from a single turbine for
a given wind speed. To account for spatio-temporal variations in wind speed
(i.e. an hourly average wind speed that varies through the hour, and a
point-specific wind speed that varies throughout the wind farm), a distribution
is used: a normal distribution with standard deviation of 40% of the average
wind speed. This distribution tends to boost the power produced at lower
wind speeds (since the power curve in this region is convex) and lower the
power produced at higher wind speeds (since the power curve in this region is
concave as the turbine tops out, and shuts down at higher wind speeds). This
tracks with the wind-farm level data shown in NREL's validation report.

Check out the ***[rap_demo.ipynb][RAP_notebook]*** notebook for demo.

#### ii. Techno-Economic Wind Integration National Dataset Toolkit
The [Techno-Economic WIND (Wind Integration National Dataset) Toolkit][WIND_web]
provides 5-min resolution data for 7 years, ranging from 2007 to 2013, at
120,000 points within the continental U.S. selected for their wind resource.
This set contains power estimates and forecasts along with a subset of
atmospheric variables. Data can be accessed via an [API][WIND_api].

The closest site to the wind farm in the network is found in the NREL dataset
and the associated power estimate is simply scaled to the plant capacity to
obtain a wind power output profile. The procedure is illustrated in the
***[te_wind_demo.ipynb][TE_WIND_notebook]*** notebook.

Also, a test can be run as follows:
```python
from prereise.gather.winddata.te_wind.test import te_wind_test

te_wind_test.test()
```


### B. Solar data

#### i. The Gridded Atmospheric Wind Integration National Dataset Toolkit
The [Gridded Atmospheric WIND (Wind Integration National Dataset)
Toolkit][WIND_web] provides 1-hour resolution irradiance data for 7 years,
ranging from 2007 to 2013, on a uniform 2x2 square kilometer grid that covers
the continental U.S., the Baja Peninsula, and parts of the Pacific and Atlantic
oceans. Data can be accessed using the Highly Scalable Data Service. NREL wrote
[example notebooks][NREL_notebooks] that demonstrate how to access the data.

Power output is estimated using a simple normalization procedure. For each
solar plant location the hourly Global Horizontal Irradiance (GHI) is divided
by the maximum GHI over the period considered and multiplied by the capacity of
the plant. This procedure is referred to as naive since it only accounts for
the plant capacity. Note that other factors can possibly affect the conversion
from solar radiation at ground to power such as the temperature at the site as
well as many system configuration including tracking technology.

Check out the ***[ga_wind_demo.ipynb][GA_WIND_notebook]*** notebook for demo.

#### ii. The National Solar Radiation Database
[NSRDB (National Solar Radiation Database)][NSRDB_web] provides 1-hour
resolution solar radiation data, ranging from 1998 to 2016, for the entire U.S.
and a growing list of international locations on a 4x4 square kilometer grid.
Data can be accessed via an [API][NSRDB_api]. Note that the Physical Solar
Model v3 is used.

An API key is required to access and use the above databases. Get your own API
key [here][NSRDB_signup].

Here, the power output can be estimated using the previously presented naive
method or a more sophisticated one. The latter uses the System Adviser Model
([SAM][SAM_web]) developed by NREL. The developer tools for creating renewable
energy system models can be downloaded [here][SAM_sdk]. Irradiance data along
with other meteorological parameters must first be retrieved from NSRDB for
each site. This information are then fed to the SAM Simulation Core (SCC) and
the power output is retrieved. The SSC reflect the technology used: photovoltaic
(PV), solar water heating and concentrating solar power (CSP). The
[*PVWatts v5*][SAM_pvwatts] model is used for all the solar plants in the grid.
The system size (in DC units) and the array type (fixed open rack, backtracked,
1-axis and 2-axis) is set for each solar plant whereas a unique value of 1.25
is used for the DC to AC ratio (see article from EIA on inverter loading ratios
[here](https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=35372)). Otherwise, all
other input parameters of the *PVWatts* model are set to their default values.
EIA reports in [form 860](https://www.eia.gov/electricity/data/eia860/. ) the
array type used by each solar PV plant. For each plant in our network, the
array type is a combination of the three technology that is calculated using
the capacity weighted average of the array type of all the plants in form 860
that are located in the same state. If no plants are reported in form 860 for a
particular state we then use the information of all the plants belonging to the
same interconnect.

The naive and the SAM methods are used in the
***[nsrdb_naive_demo.ipynb][NSRDB_naive_notebook]*** and
***[nsrdb_sam_demo.ipynb][NSRDB_sam_notebook]*** demo notebooks, respectively.


### C. Hydro Data

#### i. Hydro v1
EIA (Energy Information Administration) published monthly capacity factors for
hydro plants across the country. This dataset (available [here][hydro_cf]) is
used to produce a profile for each hydro plant in the grid. Note that we are
using the same set of capacity factor independently of the geographical
location of the plant. As a result, the profile of all the hydro plants in the
grid will have the same shape. Only the power output will differ (the scale of
the profile).

Check out the ***[hydro_v1_demo.ipynb][hydro_v1_notebook]*** notebook for demo.

#### ii. Hydro v2
##### a. Western
Hydro hourly profile v2 for Western consists of two components: profile shape
to capture the hourly variance and monthly total generation to capture the
historical summation. EIA published monthly total generation for each hydro
plant by state in form EIA 923 (available [here][EIA 923]).

Given that Washington state has the most hydro generation in the Western
Interconnection, we use the aggregated generation of the top 20 US Army Corps
managed hydro dams in Northwestern US (primarily in WA) as the shape of this
hydro profile v2 for all the states in Western except for California and
Wyoming. The data is obtained via [US Army Corps of Engineers Northwestern
Division DataQuery Tool 2.0][USACE_dataquery].

Observed from system daily outlook of California ISO (available
[here][CAISO_outlook]), the hydro generation profile follows closely to the net
demand profile. Thus, we construct the shape curve of hydro profile v2 in CA
using the net demand profile of CA in the base case scenario (Scenario 87). As
for Wyoming, due to the small name plate capacities of the hydro generators, we
simply apply a constant shape curve to avoid peak-hour violation of maximum
capacity.

The final hydro profile v2 is built by scaling the corresponding shape curves
based on the monthly total generation record in each state, then decomposing
into plant-level profiles proportional to the generator capacities. Check out the ***[western_hydro_v2_demo.ipynb][hydro_v2_western_notebook]*** notebook for demo.

##### b.Texas
The Electric Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT) published actual generation
by fuel type for each 15 minute settlement interval. For details, see the fuel
mix report available [here][ERCOT_generation]. Given this time-series historical
data, similarly with the western case, the final hydro profile v2 for Texas is
constructed by decomposing the total hydro generation profile proportional to
the generator capacities. Check out the ***[texas_hydro_v2_demo.ipynb][hydro_v2_texas_notebook]*** notebook for demo.

### D. Demand Data

*Eastern V6*

The two BAs, SPP and MISO, consist of big areas from north to south. It is
unlikely that the whole area covered by these big BAs have the same hourly
profile shape. Eastern demand v6 addresses the issue by further splitting
these two BAs into subareas. We replace overall MISO and SPP demand with
subarea demand obtained directly from contact at the BAs. We use overall
numbers from EIA and use the fractional subarea demand as the basis to split
the MISO and SPP demand.

The hourly subarea demand profiles for SPP and MISO is reported on their
official websites respectively (check
[SPP hourly load](https://marketplace.spp.org/pages/hourly-load),
[MISO hourly load](https://www.misoenergy.org/markets-and-operations/real-time--market-data/market-reports/#nt=%2FMarketReportType%3ADay-Ahead&t=10&p=0&s=MarketReportPublished&sd=desc)). The geographical definitions of these subareas are obtained directly from
contact at the BAs via either customer service or internal request management
system (check [RMS](https://spprms.issuetrak.com/Login.asp)). Given the
geographical definitions, i.e. list of counties for each subarea, each bus is
mapped to the subarea it belongs to.

The overall procedure is similar to v5 except we generate subarea
ba_to_loadzone mapping as well as prepare subarea demand from files.

*Eastern V5*

Demand data are obtained from EIA, to whom Balancing Authorities have submitted
their data. The data can be obtained using an API as demonstrated in ***[eastern_demand_v5_demo.ipynb][eastern_demand_v5_demo]*** notebook.

Module `get_eia_data` contains functions that converts the data into data frames
for further processing, as performed in ***[eastern_demand_v5_demo.ipynb][eastern_demand_v5_demo]*** .

To output the demand profile, cleaning steps were applied to the EIA data for
Eastern V5. We used adjacent demand data to fill missing values using a series
of rules:

1. Monday: look forward one day
2. Tuesday - Thursday: average of look forward one day and look back one day
3. Friday: look back one day
4. Saturday: look forward one day
5. Sunday: look back one day

If data is still missing after applying the above rules, week ahead and week
behind data is used:

1. Monday: look forward two days
2. Tuesday: look forward two days
3. Wednesday: average of look forward two days and look back two days
4. Thursday: look back two days
5. Friday: look back two days
6. Saturday - Sun: average of look back one week and look forward one week

If data is still missing after applying the above rules, week ahead and week
behind data is used:

1. Monday - Sunday: average of look back one week and look forward one week

The next step was outlier detection. The underlying physical rationale is that
demand changes are mostly driven by weather temperature changes (first or
higher order), and thermal mass limits the rate at which demand values can
change. Outliers were detected using a z-score threshold value of 3. These
outliers are then replaced by linear interpolation.

The BA counts were then distributed across each region where the BA operates,
using the region populations as weights. For example, if a BA operates in both
WA and OR, the counts for WA are weighted by the fraction of the total counts
in WA relative to the total population of WA and OR.

Lastly, buses were mapped to counties. This step requires an input data file
that stores the list of counties in each BA area territory. Some data cleaning
was necessary to deal with inconsistent county names. We also implemented a
check if there are buses where BA is empty/not found, which is due to bus being
outside of United States. These were fixed manually by assigning the bus to the
nearest county.

*Legacy Description*

Demand data are obtained from EIA, to whom Balancing Authorities have submitted
their data. The data can be obtained either by direct download from their
database using an API or by download of Excel spreadsheets. An API key is
required for the API download and this key can be obtained by a user by
registering at <https://www.eia.gov/opendata/>.

The direct download currently contains only published demand data. The Excel
spreadsheets include original and imputed demand data, as well as results of
various data quality checks done by EIA. Documentation about the dataset can
be found [here][demand_doc]. Excel spreadsheets can be downloaded by clicking
on the links in page 9 (Table of all US and foreign connected balancing
authorities).

Module `get_eia_data` contains functions that converts the data into data frames
for further processing.

To test EIA download (This requires an EIA API key):
```python
from prereise.gather.demanddata.eia.tests import test_get_eia_data

test_get_eia_data.test_eia_download()
```
To test EIA download from Excel:
```python
from prereise.gather.demanddata.eia.tests import test_get_eia_data

test_get_eia_data.test_from_excel()
```

The ***[assemble_ba_from_excel_demo.ipynb][demand_notebook]*** notebook illustrates
usage.

To output the demand profile, cleaning steps were applied to the EIA data:  
1) missing data imputation - the EIA method was used, i.e., EIA published data
was used; beyond this, NA's were converted to float zeros;  
2) missing hours were added.

The BA counts were then distributed across each region where the BA operates,
using the region populations as weights. For example, if a BA operates in both
WA and OR, the counts for WA are weighted by the fraction of the total counts
in WA relative to the total population of WA and OR.

The next step consist in detecting outliers by looking for large changes in the
slope of the demand data. The underlying physical rationale is that demand
changes are mostly driven by weather temperature changes (first or higher
order), and thermal mass limits the rate at which demand values can change. By
looking at the slope of demand data, it is seen that the slope distribution is
normally distributed, and outliers can be easily found by imposing a z-score
threshold value of 3. These outliers are then replaced by linear interpolation.

To test outlier detection, use:
```python
from prereise.gather.demanddata.eia.tests import test_clean_data

test_clean_data.test_slope_interpolate()
```
The ***[ba_anomaly_detection_demo.ipynb][demand_anomaly]*** notebook illustrates
usage.


[RAP]: https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/data-access/model-data/model-datasets/rapid-refresh-rap
[RAP_notebook]: https://github.com/intvenlab/PreREISE/blob/develop/prereise/gather/winddata/rap/demo/rap_demo.ipynb
[NetCDF]: https://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/thredds/current/tds/reference/NetcdfSubsetServiceReference.html
[WIND_doc]: https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy14osti/61714.pdf
[WIND_web]: https://www.nrel.gov/grid/wind-toolkit.html
[WIND_api]: https://developer.nrel.gov/docs/wind/wind-toolkit/
[TE_WIND_notebook]: https://github.com/intvenlab/PreREISE/blob/develop/prereise/gather/winddata/te_wind/demo/te_wind_demo.ipynb
[NREL_notebooks]: https://github.com/NREL/hsds-examples
[GA_WIND_notebook]: https://github.com/intvenlab/PreREISE/blob/develop/prereise/gather/solardata/ga_wind/demo/ga_wind_demo.ipynb
[NSRDB_web]: https://nsrdb.nrel.gov/
[NSRDB_api]: https://developer.nrel.gov/docs/solar/nsrdb/
[NSRDB_signup]: https://developer.nrel.gov/signup/
[SAM_web]: https://sam.nrel.gov/
[SAM_sdk]: https://sam.nrel.gov/sdk
[SAM_pvwatts]: https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy14osti/62641.pdf
[NSRDB_naive_notebook]: https://github.com/intvenlab/PreREISE/blob/develop/prereise/gather/solardata/nsrdb/demo/nsrdb_naive_demo.ipynb
[NSRDB_sam_notebook]: https://github.com/intvenlab/PreREISE/blob/develop/prereise/gather/solardata/nsrdb/demo/nsrdb_sam_demo.ipynb
[hydro_cf]: https://www.eia.gov/electricity/annual/html/epa_04_08_b.html
[hydro_v1_notebook]: https://github.com/intvenlab/PreREISE/blob/develop/prereise/gather/hydrodata/eia/demo/hydro_v1_demo.ipynb
[demand_doc]: https://www.eia.gov/realtime_grid/docs/userguide-knownissues.pdf
[demand_notebook]:https://github.com/intvenlab/PreREISE/blob/develop/prereise/gather/demanddata/eia/demo/assemble_ba_from_excel_demo.ipynb
[demand_anomaly]: https://github.com/intvenlab/PreREISE/blob/develop/prereise/gather/demanddata/eia/demo/ba_anomaly_detection_demo.ipynb
[EIA 923]: https://www.eia.gov/electricity/data/eia923/
[CAISO_outlook]: http://www.caiso.com/TodaysOutlook/Pages/default.aspx
[hydro_v2_western_notebook]: https://github.com/intvenlab/PreREISE/blob/develop/prereise/gather/hydrodata/eia/demo/western_hydro_v2_demo.ipynb
[hydro_v2_texas_notebook]: https://github.com/intvenlab/PreREISE/blob/develop/prereise/gather/hydrodata/eia/demo/texas_hydro_v2_demo.ipynb
[issue #71]: https://github.com/intvenlab/PreREISE/issues/71
[EIA 860]: https://www.eia.gov/electricity/data/eia860/
[ERCOT_generation]: http://www.ercot.com/gridinfo/generation/
[USACE_dataquery]: http://www.nwd-wc.usace.army.mil/dd/common/dataquery/www/
[EIA 930]: https://www.eia.gov/opendata/
[demand_profiles]: https://github.com/intvenlab/PreREISE/blob/develop/docs/demand_profiles.md
[hydro_profiles]: https://github.com/intvenlab/PreREISE/blob/develop/docs/hydro_profiles.md
[solar_profiles]: https://github.com/intvenlab/PreREISE/blob/develop/docs/solar_profiles.md
[wind_profiles]: https://github.com/intvenlab/PreREISE/blob/develop/docs/wind_profiles.md
