Summary
#######
Decarbonizing the transportation sector is one of the five grand challenges of
decarbonizing the economy. In order to accurately capture the future trend of
transportation electrification and its interactions with the electricity sector and
other sectors such as building and manufacturing, a high resolution and accurate
transportation electrification model integrated into the simulation framework with other
sectors is necessary. A few key questions arise when determining the additional load
from charging electric vehicles on the electric grid â€“ how many electric vehicles of
which types are expected to be on the roads by a given year and what are their typical
trip patterns, which in turn determines when charging is most likely to happen.  As is
frequently discussed, charging could have significant flexibility as to its precise
timing, which ties this project into the Demand Flexibility project. In future, highly 
integrated whole-economy energy systems, the optimal operation of the transportation 
sector is affected by other sectors, such as the building sector. When electric vehicles 
are charged through chargers located in buildings, the distributed energy resources and 
space heating/cooling load in buildings could be optimized together with electric 
vehicle charging to achieve more emissions reduction and cost savings. This 
transportation model is one of the key components of the
multi-sector integrated energy systems model.


The overall objective of the Transportation Electrification Project is to develop a
module that can capture the magnitude and spatiotemporal variation of the additional
electricity demand from electrification of most of the on-road transportation sector,
including electric light-duty vehicles (LDVs), light-duty trucks (LDTs), medium-duty
vehicles (MDVs), and heavy-duty vehicles (HDVs), including fleet vehicles (e.g., buses).
The core activities include (1) development of detailed data sets that represent the
electricity demand patterns due to vehicle mobility, growth in electric vehicle
penetration, and flexibility parameters for electrified LDVs, LDTs, MDVs, and HDVs
consisting of private and publicly-owned fleets; (2) development of code that can
generate electricity demand profiles for each vehicle type under different levels of
charging intelligence; and (3) integration of the modeling capability for determining
electrified vehicle load profiles into the open-access, large-scale grid model developed
by the Breakthrough Energy Grid Modeling team.
